## Conclusion
{:#conclusion}

In this paper we introduced Traqula, a framework for modular Query parsing, generation and transformation.
We argue that the existence of a modular parser is vital for the future of SPARQL querying,
especially in an increasingly heterogeneous federated environment.
The modularity of the various steps in query manipulation will allow us to rapidly experiment with new, or modified language features.
Additionally,
Traqula opens the way to easy query rewriting between different query languages by providing easy AST and algebra manipulation methods,
as well as opening the way for modular query tooling such as linters, reformatters etc.

Traqula is ready for a wide-spread adoption. It has already been integrated into the modular query processor Comunica,
and a proof of concept implementation proving Traqula's usability within Comunica to support new language features has been made.
Traqula is available on GitHub under the MIT license and is governed by the Comunica association,
ensuring future maintenance and commitment to tackle industry problems.

The future of Traqula is still broad, hoping for community adoption and involvement;
through its modularity and ease of use,
Traqula should support more  query languages in the future, such as SHACL-compact and GQL.
To tackle the problem of heterogeneous SPARQL endpoints, the authors are already working
to develop a generic rewriting algorithm using Traqula; rewriting SPARQL 1.2 queries
using triple patterns to target RDF 1.1 datasets under a given reification scheme,
such that the BGPs in the rewritten queries no longer contain triple terms.


## Acknowledgements
{:.noBefore}


Jitse De Smet is a predoctoral fellow of the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) (1SB8525N).
Ruben Taelman is a postdoctoral fellow of the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) (1202124N).
